MicroRestD
Version 1.2.5-dev

= Introduction =

%!include: readme.t2t


= MicroRestD Operations =

MicroRestD provides a simple REST server. The server supports HEAD, GET,
POST, PUT and DELETE methods and automatic parsing of query strings
and POST ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` and ``multipart/form-data``
request bodies.

Linux, OS X and Windows systems are supported (although only ``select`` is
supported on Windows, while ``poll`` is used on Linux and OS X).

Each request is processed by a new thread by default, but it is possible to use
a thread pool. Classes for generating JSON and XML responses are provided.
Responses can be generated progressively, so multiple responses can be
processed simultaneously by one thread.

Internally, [libmicrohttpd http://www.gnu.org/software/libmicrohttpd/] is used
as a HTTP server. Also [pugixml http://pugixml.org/] is provided for XML
parsing and manupulation.


= MicroRestD API Reference =

The MicroRestD library is contained in ``ufal::microrestd`` namespace,
including both [libmicrohttpd http://www.gnu.org/software/libmicrohttpd/]
and [pugixml http://pugixml.org/] libraries.

The MicroRestD API is available through the ``microrestd.h`` header.
To compile MicroRestD, include the ``Makefile.include`` makefile, compile
the sources listed in ``MICRORESTD_OBJECTS`` variable and link the
libraries listed in either ``MICRORESTD_LIBRARIES_POSIX`` or
``MICRORESTD_LIBRARIES_WIN`` depending on the operating system.


== Structure string_piece ==[string_piece]
```
struct string_piece {
  const char* str;
  size_t len;

  string_piece();
  string_piece(const char* str);
  string_piece(const char* str, size_t len);
  string_piece(const std::string& str);
}
```

The [``string_piece`` #string_piece] is used for efficient string passing. The string
referenced in [``string_piece`` #string_piece] is not owned by it, so users have to make sure
the referenced string exists as long as the [``string_piece`` #string_piece].


== Class response_generator ==[response_generator]
```
class response_generator {
 public:
  virtual ~response_generator() {}

  virtual bool [generate #response_generator_generate]() = 0;
  virtual [string_piece #string_piece] [current #response_generator_current]() const = 0;
  virtual void [consume #response_generator_consume](size_t length) = 0;
};
```

The [``response_generator`` #response_generator] abstract class defines an
interface of progressive response generator.

=== response_generator::generate ===[response_generator_generate]
``` virtual bool generate() = 0;

Try generating more response data. Returns ``false`` if there are no more data
to be generated and the end of the response has been reached. It is guaranteed
[``generate`` #generate] is never called again after returning ``false``.

=== response_generator::current ===[response_generator_current]
``` virtual [string_piece #string_piece] current() const = 0;

Return current response data.

=== response_generator::consume ===[response_generator_consume]
``` virtual void consume(size_t length) = 0;

Drop first ``length`` chars of the response data.

Note that when [``consume`` #response_generator_consume] is called, it is
guaranteed that ``length >= [current #response_generator_current]().len / 2``
so amortized cost of all calls to [``consume`` #response_generator_consume] is
at most linear in the response size.


== Class rest_request ==[rest_request]
```
class rest_request {
 public:
  virtual ~rest_request() {}

  virtual bool [respond #rest_request_respond_string_piece](const char* content_type, [string_piece #string_piece] body, const std::vector<std::pair<const char*, const char*>>& headers = {}) = 0;
  virtual bool [respond #rest_request_respond_generator](const char* content_type, [response_generator #response_generator]* generator, const std::vector<std::pair<const char*, const char*>>& headers = {}) = 0;
  virtual bool [respond_not_found #rest_request_respond_not_found]() = 0;
  virtual bool [respond_method_not_allowed #rest_request_respond_method_not_allowed](const char* comma_separated_allowed_methods) = 0;
  virtual bool [respond_error #rest_request_respond_error]([string_piece #string_piece] error, int code = 400) = 0;

  std::string url;
  std::string method;
  std::string body;
  std::string content_type;
  std::unordered_map<std::string, std::string> params;
};
```

The [``rest_request`` #rest_request] class represents REST request and provides
means of responding to it.

The following variables are provided:
- ``url``
- ``method``
- ``body``, possibly empty
- ``content_type`` of body, possibly empty
- ``params``, the GET and POST parameters of the request


=== rest_request::respond with string_piece ===[rest_request_respond_string_piece]
``` virtual bool respond(const char* content_type, [string_piece #string_piece] body, const std::vector<std::pair<const char*, const char*>>& headers = {}) = 0;

Respond HTTP OK response with specified ``content_type`` and ``body``.

Both the ``content_type`` and the ``body`` are copied, because the response can be
sent at any later time, even after the ``rest_request`` is destroyed.

The response has the given ``Content-Type`` HTTP header, the
``Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *`` header, and the ``Connection: close``
header. Additional HTTP headers can be set using the ``header`` parameter.

=== rest_request::respond with response_generator ===[rest_request_respond_generator]
``` virtual bool respond(const char* content_type, [response_generator #response_generator]* generator, const std::vector<std::pair<const char*, const char*>>& headers = {}) = 0;

Respond HTTP OK response with specified ``content_type`` using the given [``response_generator`` #response_generator].

The response has the given ``Content-Type`` HTTP header, the
``Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *`` header, and the ``Connection: close``
header. Additional HTTP headers can be set using the ``header`` parameter.

=== rest_request::respond_not_found ===[rest_request_respond_not_found]
``` virtual bool respond_not_found() = 0;

Respond HTTP Not Found.

=== rest_request::respond_method_not_allowed ===[rest_request_respond_method_not_allowed]
``` virtual bool respond_method_not_allowed(const char* comma_separated_allowed_methods) = 0;

Respond HTTP Method Not Allowed with supplied list of allowed methods.

=== rest_request::respond_error ===[rest_request_respond_error]
``` virtual bool respond_error([string_piece #string_piece] error, int code = 400) = 0;

Respond with specified HTTP code, ``text/plain`` content-type and specified error body.

== Class rest_service ==[rest_service]
```
class rest_service {
 public:
  virtual bool [handle #rest_service_handle]([rest_request #rest_request]& req) = 0;
};
```

The [``rest_service`` #rest_service] represents an interface of a REST service.

=== rest_service::handle ===[rest_service_handle]
``` virtual bool handle([rest_request #rest_request]& req) = 0;

Handle the given [``rest_request`` #rest_request]. The return code should be the one returned by
the [``rest_request`` #rest_request]::respond* methods.


== Class rest_server ==[rest_server]
```
class rest_server {
 public:
  void [set_log_file #rest_server_set_log_file](std::iostream* log_file, unsigned max_log_size = 0);
  void [set_min_generated #rest_server_set_min_generated](unsigned min_generated);
  void [set_max_connections #rest_server_set_max_connections](unsigned max_connections);
  void [set_max_request_body_size #rest_server_set_max_request_body_size](unsigned max_request_body_size);
  void [set_threads #rest_server_set_threads](unsigned threads);
  void [set_timeout #rest_server_set_timeout](unsigned timeout);

  bool [start #rest_server_start]([rest_service #rest_service]* service, unsigned port);
  void [stop #rest_server_stop]();
  bool [wait_until_signalled #rest_server_wait_until_signalled]();
};
```

Main REST server class.

=== rest_server::set_log_file ===[rest_server_set_log_file]
``` void set_log_file(iostream* log_file, unsigned max_log_size);

Log to the specified ``log_file``. If ``nullptr`` is passed, logging is disabled.
Note that the [``rest_server`` #rest_server] does not close ``log_file`` on exit.

If ``max_log_size`` is nonzero, it limits the size of every logged request parameter.

By default, logging is disabled.

=== rest_server::set_min_generated ===[rest_server_set_min_generated]
``` void set_min_generated(unsigned min_generated);

When a [``response_generator`` #response_generator] is used, ``min_generated``
specifies minimum buffer size which is sent (i.e. [``generate`` #response_generator_generate]
is called until this many chars are produced).

Note that maximum buffer size is limited to 32kB, so reasonable maximum for
``min_generated`` is something like 24kB.

Default value of ``min_generated`` is 1kB.

=== rest_server::set_max_connections ===[rest_server_set_max_connections]
``` void set_max_connections(unsigned max_connections);

Limit number of maximum concurrent connections (with 0 denoting unlimited number
of connections). When this limit is reached, no more connections are accepted until
some existing requests are handled.

Default value of ``max_connections`` is 0 (i.e. unlimited).

=== rest_server::set_max_request_body_size ===[rest_server_set_max_request_body_size]
``` void set_max_request_body_size(unsigned max_request_body_size);

Limit the maximum request body size (with 0 denoting no size limit).

Default value of ``max_request_body_size`` is 0 (i.e. unlimited).

=== rest_server::set_threads ===[rest_server_set_threads]
``` void set_threads(unsigned threads);

Set number of concurrently running REST server threads. If the value 0 is used,
there is one listening thread and each request is handled by a new thread.
If a nonzero value //t// is used, there are //t// threads each listening and
processing its connections (the ``max_connections`` limit is divided equally
among them in this case).

Default value of ``threads`` is 0 (i.e. each request gets a new thread).

=== rest_server::set_timeout ===[rest_server_set_timeout]
``` void set_timeout(unsigned timeout);

Set inactivity timeout in seconds (with 0 denoting no time limit).

Default value of ``timeout`` is 0 (i.e. no timeout).

=== rest_server::start ===[rest_server_start]
``` bool start([rest_service #rest_service]* service, unsigned port);

Try starting the specified [``rest_service`` #rest_service] on specified ``port``.
If the service was successfully started, ``true`` is returned, ``false`` otherwise.
The service is started in a background thread(s), so the calling thread can
continue operating.

That the socket is opened with ``SO_REUSEPORT`` on POSIX systems (and with
``SO_REUSEADDR`` on Windows which is roughly equivalent), so multiple services
can be bound to the same port.

Note the server does not take ownership of the ``service``.

=== rest_server::stop ===[rest_server_stop]
``` void stop();

Stop running REST server. No more connections are accepted, but current connections
are handled before returning.

=== rest_server::wait_until_signalled ===[rest_server_wait_until_signalled]
``` bool wait_until_signalled();

Wait until shutdown/restart is signalled. Returns ``false`` on error and ``true``
if shutdown/restart was signalled.

On POSIX systems, receiving either ``SIGUSR1`` signal or ``SIGINT`` (Ctrl+C)
signal is used to indicate shutdown/restart.  On Windows, console control
handler receiving Ctrl+C is used.


== Class json_builder ==[json_builder]

```
class json_builder {
 public:
  // Clear
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [clear #json_builder_clear]();

  // Encode
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [object #json_builder_object]();
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [array #json_builder_array]();
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [key #json_builder_key]([string_piece #string_piece] str);
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [value #json_builder_value]([string_piece #string_piece] str, bool append = false);
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [value_xml_escape #json_builder_value_xml_escape]([string_piece #string_piece] str, bool append = false);
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [indent #json_builder_indent]();
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [close #json_builder_close]();
  inline [json_builder #json_builder]& [finish #json_builder_finish](bool indent = false);

  // Return current json
  inline [string_piece #string_piece] [current #json_builder_current]() const;
  inline [operator string_piece #json_builder_operator_string_piece]() const;

  // Remove current json prefix; for response_generator
  void [discard_current_prefix #json_builder_discard_current_prefix](size_t length);

  // JSON mime
  static const char* mime;
};
```

The [``json_builder`` #json_builder] class is a simple JSON generator. The output
is buffered, so either whole JSON can be produced, or any already generated JSON prefix
can be discarded (which is used in [``response_generator`` #response_generator] and
[``json_response_generator`` #json_response_generator]).

Most methods return the current object, so they can be chained like
``json.object().key("id").value("42").close()``.

By default, no additional spaces or newlines are present in the generated JSON, but can
be added using the [``indent`` #json_builder_indent] method.

=== json_builder::clear ===[json_builder_clear]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& clear();

Clear the already generated JSON.

=== json_builder::object ===[json_builder_object]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& object();

Start a JSON object.

=== json_builder::array ===[json_builder_array]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& array();

Start a JSON array.

=== json_builder::key ===[json_builder_key]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& key([string_piece #string_piece] str);

Add an object key to the generated JSON.

=== json_builder::value ===[json_builder_value]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& value([string_piece #string_piece] str, bool append = false);

Add a value (either an array element or value of a key in an object) to the generated JSON.
If ``append`` is ``true`` and the last generated element of the JSON was a value, append to that value
instead of adding a new value.

=== json_builder::value_xml_escape ===[json_builder_value_xml_escape]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& value_xml_escape([string_piece #string_piece] str, bool append = false);

Perform XML escaping on the given value and add it to the generated JSON. This method is useful if a XML is being
embedded in the JSON and it needs to be escaped.

If ``append`` is ``true`` and the last generated element of the JSON was a value, append to that value
instead of adding a new value.

=== json_builder::indent ===[json_builder_indent]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& indent();

Add indent to the generated JSON. It generally appends a newline and then
a space for each opened object/array, but if it is called after an object key
it only adds a space and when it is used before a
[``close`` #json_builder_close] it adds one less space.

=== json_builder::close ===[json_builder_close]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& close();

Close the newest opened object or array.

=== json_builder::finish ===[json_builder_finish]
``` inline [json_builder #json_builder]& finish(bool indent = false);

Close all opened arrays and objects (calling [``indent`` #json_builder_indent] before
every one if requested) and then append a newline after the finished JSON.

Note that [``finish`` #json_builder_finish] call is not mandatory, it is needed
only when newline after the generated JSON is required.

=== json_builder::current ===[json_builder_current]
``` inline [string_piece #string_piece] current() const;

Returns the current generated JSON (without the prefixes discarded via
[``discard_current_prefix`` #json_builder_discard_current_prefix]).

=== json_builder::operator string_piece ===[json_builder_operator_string_piece]
``` inline operator string_piece() const;

Returns the current generated JSON (without the prefixes discarded via
[``discard_current_prefix`` #json_builder_discard_current_prefix]).

=== json_builder::discard_current_prefix ===[json_builder_discard_current_prefix]
``` void discard_current_prefix(size_t length);

Discard generated JSON prefix of specified length.


== Class json_response_generator ==[json_response_generator]
```
class json_response_generator : public [response_generator #response_generator] {
 public:
  virtual [string_piece #string_piece] current() const override;
  virtual void consume(size_t length) override;

  [json_builder #json_builder] json;
  static const char* mime;
};
```

The [``json_response_generator`` #json_response_generator] class provides a
[``response_generator`` #response_generator] implementation producing a JSON
response using a [``json_builder`` #json_builder].

The only method required to be implemented is the
[``response_generator`` #response_generator]``::``[``generate`` #response_generator_generate],
which should append to the ``json`` field.


== Class xml_builder ==[xml_builder]
```
// Declarations
class xml_builder {
 public:
  // Clear
  inline xml_builder& [clear #xml_builder_clear]();

  // XML declaration
  [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [declaration #xml_builder_declaration]();

  // Encode
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [element #xml_builder_element]([string_piece #string_piece] name);
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [attribute #xml_builder_attribute]([string_piece #string_piece] name, [string_piece #string_piece] value);
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [text #xml_builder_text]([string_piece #string_piece] str);
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [indent #xml_builder_indent]();
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [close #xml_builder_close]();
  inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& [finish #xml_builder_finish](bool indent = false);

  // Return current xml
  inline [string_piece #string_piece] [current #xml_builder_current]() const;
  inline [operator string_piece #xml_builder_operator_string_piece]() const;

  // Remove current xml prefix; for response_generator
  void [discard_current_prefix #xml_builder_discard_current_prefix](size_t length);

  // XML mime
  static const char* mime;
};
```

The [``xml_builder`` #xml_builder] class is a simple XML generator. The output
is buffered, so either whole XML can be produced, or any already generated XML prefix
can be discarded (which is used in [``response_generator`` #response_generator] and
[``xml_response_generator`` #xml_response_generator]).

Most methods return the current object, so they can be chained like
``xml.element("div").attribute("class","alert").text("Alert").close()``.

By default, no additional spaces or newlines are present in the generated XML, but can
be added using the [``indent`` #xml_builder_indent] method.

=== xml_builder::clear ===[xml_builder_clear]
``` inline xml_builder& clear();

Clear the already generated XML.

=== xml_builder::declaration ===[xml_builder_declaration]
``` [xml_builder #xml_builder]& declaration();

Append the following a simple XML 1.0 declaration to the document:
``` <?xml version="1.0"?>

=== xml_builder::element ===[xml_builder_element]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& element([string_piece #string_piece] name);

Append the specified element to the generated XML.

=== xml_builder::attribute ===[xml_builder_attribute]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& attribute([string_piece #string_piece] name, [string_piece #string_piece] value);

Append the given attribute to the last generated element, assuming it has not
been closed and no text was added to it. Otherwise, the call is ignored.

=== xml_builder::text ===[xml_builder_text]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& text([string_piece #string_piece] str);

Add text (pcdata) to the last generated opened element.

=== xml_builder::indent ===[xml_builder_indent]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& indent();

Add indent to the generated XML. It generally appends a newline and then
a space for each opened element, but if it is used before a
[``close`` #json_builder_close] it adds one less space.

=== xml_builder::close ===[xml_builder_close]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& close();

Close the last generated opened element.

=== xml_builder::finish ===[xml_builder_finish]
``` inline [xml_builder #xml_builder]& finish(bool indent = false);

Close all opened elements (calling [``indent`` #xml_builder_indent] before
every one if requested) and then append a newline after the finished XML.

Note that [``finish`` #xml_builder_finish] call is not mandatory, it is needed
only when newline after the generated XML is required.

=== xml_builder::current ===[xml_builder_current]
``` inline [string_piece #string_piece] current() const;

Returns the current generated XML (without the prefixes discarded via
[``discard_current_prefix`` #xml_builder_discard_current_prefix]).

=== xml_builder::operator string_piece ===[xml_builder_operator_string_piece]
``` inline operator string_piece() const;

Returns the current generated XML (without the prefixes discarded via
[``discard_current_prefix`` #xml_builder_discard_current_prefix]).


=== xml_builder::discard_current_prefix ===[xml_builder_discard_current_prefix]
``` void discard_current_prefix(size_t length);

Discard generated XML prefix of specified length.


== Class xml_response_generator ==[xml_response_generator]
```
class xml_response_generator : public [response_generator #response_generator] {
 public:
  virtual [string_piece #string_piece] current() const override;
  virtual void consume(size_t length) override;

  [xml_builder #xml_builder] xml;
  static const char* mime;
};
```

The [``xml_response_generator`` #xml_response_generator] class provides a
[``response_generator`` #response_generator] implementation producing a XML
response using a [``xml_builder`` #xml_builder].

The only method required to be implemented is the
[``response_generator`` #response_generator]``::``[``generate`` #response_generator_generate],
which should append to the ``xml`` field.


== Structure version ==[version]
```
struct version {
  unsigned major;
  unsigned minor;
  unsigned patch;
  std::string prerelease;

  // Returns current version.
  static [version #version] [current #version_current]();
};
```

The [``version`` #version] class represents MicroRestD version
according to [Semantic Versioning http://semver.org/].

=== version::current ===[version_current]
``` static [version #version] current();

Returns current MicroRestD version.

= Pugixml =

The [pugixml http://pugixml.org/] library 1.5 is available through the
``pugixml.h`` header. The source files ``MICRORESTD_PUGIXML_OBJECTS`` must be
compiled in order to use the library.

Note that there are some minor modifications to the original [pugixml http://pugixml.org/] library:
- The library is available in ``ufal::microrestd::pugixml`` namespace instead of the original ``pugixml``.
- STL and XPATH modules of the original library are not available.
- The element and attribute matching ignores any XML namespaces used.
